The goal of this tutorial is to provide “end-to-end” instructions on implementing a state-space controller for a flywheel. By following this tutorial, readers will learn how to:

Create an accurate state-space model of a flywheel using system identification or CAD software.

Implement a Kalman Filter to filter encoder velocity measurements without lag.

Implement a LQR feedback controller which, when combined with model-based feedforward, will generate voltage inputs to drive the flywheel to a reference.

This tutorial is intended to be approachable for teams without a great deal of programming expertise. While the WPILib library offers significant flexibility in the manner in which its state-space control features are implemented, closely following the implementation outlined in this tutorial should provide teams with a basic structure which can be reused for a variety of state-space systems.

The full example is available in the state-space flywheel (Java/C++/Python) and state-space flywheel system identification (Java/C++/Python) example projects.

Why Use State-Space Control?
Because state-space control focuses on creating an accurate model of our system, we can accurately predict how our model will respond to control inputs. This allows us to simulate our mechanisms without access to a physical robot, as well as easily choose gains that we know will work well. Having a model also allows us to create lagless filters, such as Kalman Filters, to optimally filter sensor readings.

Modeling Our Flywheel
Recall that continuous state-space systems are modeled using the following system of equations:


Where x-dot is the rate of change of the system’s state,
 is the system’s current state,
 is the input to the system, and
 is the system’s output.

Let’s use this system of equations to model our flywheel in two different ways. We’ll first model it using system identification using the SysId toolsuite, and then model it based on the motor and flywheel’s moment of inertia.

The first step of building up our state-space system is picking our system’s states. We can pick anything we want as a state – we could pick completely unrelated states if we wanted – but it helps to pick states that are important. We can include hidden states in our state (such as elevator velocity if we were only able to measure its position) and let our Kalman Filter estimate their values. Remember that the states we choose will be driven towards their respective references by the feedback controller (typically the Linear-Quadratic Regulator since it’s optimal).

For our flywheel, we care only about one state: its velocity. While we could chose to also model its acceleration, the inclusion of this state isn’t necessary for our system.

Next, we identify the inputs to our system. Inputs can be thought of as things we can put “into” our system to change its state. In the case of the flywheel (and many other single-jointed mechanisms in FRC®), we have just one input: voltage applied to the motor. By choosing voltage as our input (over something like motor duty cycle), we can compensate for battery voltage sag as battery load increases.

A continuous-time state-space system writes x-dot, or the instantaneous rate of change of the system’s system's state, as proportional to the current state and inputs. Because our state is angular velocity,
 will be the flywheel’s angular acceleration.

Next, we will model our flywheel as a continuous-time state-space system. WPILib’s LinearSystem will convert this to discrete-time internally. Review state-space notation for more on continuous-time and discrete-time systems.

Modeling with System Identification
To rewrite this in state-space notation using system identification, we recall from the flywheel state-space notation example, where we rewrote the following equation in terms of
.






Where
 is flywheel velocity,
 and
 are flywheel acceleration, and
 is voltage. Rewriting this with the standard convention of
 for the state vector and
 for the input vector, we find:





The second part of state-space notation relates the system’s current state and inputs to the output. In the case of a flywheel, our output vector
 (or things that our sensors can measure) is our flywheel’s velocity, which also happens to be an element of our state vector
. Therefore, our output matrix is

, and our system feedthrough matrix is

. Writing this out in continuous-time state-space notation yields the following.








The LinearSystem class contains methods for easily creating state-space systems identified using system identification. This example shows a flywheel model with a kV of 0.023 and a kA of 0.001:


Java
  // Volts per (radian per second)
  private static final double kFlywheelKv = 0.023;

  // Volts per (radian per second squared)
  private static final double kFlywheelKa = 0.001;

  // The plant holds a state-space model of our flywheel. This system has the following properties:
  //
  // States: [velocity], in radians per second.
  // Inputs (what we can "put in"): [voltage], in volts.
  // Outputs (what we can measure): [velocity], in radians per second.
  //
  // The Kv and Ka constants are found using the FRC Characterization toolsuite.
  private final LinearSystem<N1, N1, N1> m_flywheelPlant =
      LinearSystemId.identifyVelocitySystem(kFlywheelKv, kFlywheelKa);

C++

Python
Modeling Using Flywheel Moment of Inertia and Gearing
A flywheel can also be modeled without access to a physical robot, using information about the motors, gearing, and flywheel’s moment of inertia. A full derivation of this model is presented in Section 12.3 of Controls Engineering in FRC.

The LinearSystem class contains methods to easily create a model of a flywheel from the flywheel’s motors, gearing and moment of inertia. The moment of inertia can be calculated using CAD software or using physics. The examples used here are detailed in the flywheel example project (Java/C++/Python).

Note

For WPILib’s state-space classes, gearing is written as output over input – that is, if the flywheel spins slower than the motors, this number should be greater than one.

Note

The C++ LinearSystem class uses the C++ Units Library to prevent unit mixups and assert dimensionality.


Java
  private static final double kFlywheelMomentOfInertia = 0.00032; // kg * m^2

  // Reduction between motors and encoder, as output over input. If the flywheel spins slower than
  // the motors, this number should be greater than one.
  private static final double kFlywheelGearing = 1.0;

  // The plant holds a state-space model of our flywheel. This system has the following properties:
  //
  // States: [velocity], in radians per second.
  // Inputs (what we can "put in"): [voltage], in volts.
  // Outputs (what we can measure): [velocity], in radians per second.
  private final LinearSystem<N1, N1, N1> m_flywheelPlant =
      LinearSystemId.createFlywheelSystem(
          DCMotor.getNEO(2), kFlywheelMomentOfInertia, kFlywheelGearing);

C++

Python
Kalman Filters: Observing Flywheel State
Kalman filters are used to filter our velocity measurements using our state-space model to generate a state estimate
. As our flywheel model is linear, we can use a Kalman filter to estimate the flywheel’s velocity. WPILib’s Kalman filter takes a LinearSystem (which we found above), along with standard deviations of model and sensor measurements. We can adjust how “smooth” our state estimate is by adjusting these weights. Larger state standard deviations will cause the filter to “distrust” our state estimate and favor new measurements more highly, while larger measurement standard deviations will do the opposite.

In the case of a flywheel we start with a state standard deviation of 3 rad/s and a measurement standard deviation of 0.01 rad/s. These values are up to the user to choose – these weights produced a filter that was tolerant to some noise but whose state estimate quickly reacted to external disturbances for a flywheel – and should be tuned to create a filter that behaves well for your specific flywheel. Graphing states, measurements, inputs, references, and outputs over time is a great visual way to tune Kalman filters.

The effect of a Kalman, median, and IIR filters on some flywheel data.
The above graph shows two differently tuned Kalman filters, as well as a single-pole IIR filter and a Median Filter. This data was collected with a shooter over ~5 seconds, and four balls were run through the shooter (as seen in the four dips in velocity). While there are no hard rules on choosing good state and measurement standard deviations, they should in general be tuned to trust the model enough to reject noise while reacting quickly to external disturbances.

Because the feedback controller computes error using the x-hat estimated by the Kalman filter, the controller will react to disturbances only as quickly the filter’s state estimate changes. In the above chart, the upper left plot (with a state standard deviation of 3.0 and measurement standard deviation of 0.2) produced a filter that reacted quickly to disturbances while rejecting noise, while the upper right plot shows a filter that was barely affected by the velocity dips.


Java
  // The observer fuses our encoder data and voltage inputs to reject noise.
  private final KalmanFilter<N1, N1, N1> m_observer =
      new KalmanFilter<>(
          Nat.N1(),
          Nat.N1(),
          m_flywheelPlant,
          VecBuilder.fill(3.0), // How accurate we think our model is
          VecBuilder.fill(0.01), // How accurate we think our encoder
          // data is
          0.020);

C++

Python
Because Kalman filters use our state-space model in the Predict step, it is important that our model is as accurate as possible. One way to verify this is to record a flywheel’s input voltage and velocity over time, and replay this data by calling only predict on the Kalman filter. Then, the kV and kA gains (or moment of inertia and other constants) can be adjusted until the model closely matches the recorded data.

Linear-Quadratic Regulators and Plant Inversion Feedforward
The Linear-Quadratic Regulator finds a feedback controller to drive our flywheel system to its reference. Because our flywheel has just one state, the control law picked by our LQR will be in the form
 where
 is a 1x1 matrix; in other words, the control law picked by LQR is simply a proportional controller, or a PID controller with only a P gain. This gain is chosen by our LQR based on the state excursion and control efforts we pass it. More on tuning LQR controllers can be found in the LQR application example.

Much like SimpleMotorFeedforward can be used to generate feedforward voltage inputs given kS, kV, and kA constants, the Plant Inversion Feedforward class generate feedforward voltage inputs given a state-space system. The voltage commands generated by the LinearSystemLoop class are the sum of the feedforward and feedback inputs.


Java
  // A LQR uses feedback to create voltage commands.
  private final LinearQuadraticRegulator<N1, N1, N1> m_controller =
      new LinearQuadraticRegulator<>(
          m_flywheelPlant,
          VecBuilder.fill(8.0), // qelms. Velocity error tolerance, in radians per second. Decrease
          // this to more heavily penalize state excursion, or make the controller behave more
          // aggressively.
          VecBuilder.fill(12.0), // relms. Control effort (voltage) tolerance. Decrease this to more
          // heavily penalize control effort, or make the controller less aggressive. 12 is a good
          // starting point because that is the (approximate) maximum voltage of a battery.
          0.020); // Nominal time between loops. 0.020 for TimedRobot, but can be
  // lower if using notifiers.

C++

Python
Bringing it All Together: LinearSystemLoop
LinearSystemLoop combines our system, controller, and observer that we created earlier. The constructor shown will also instantiate a PlantInversionFeedforward.


Java
  // The state-space loop combines a controller, observer, feedforward and plant for easy control.
  private final LinearSystemLoop<N1, N1, N1> m_loop =
      new LinearSystemLoop<>(m_flywheelPlant, m_controller, m_observer, 12.0, 0.020);

C++

Python
Once we have our LinearSystemLoop, the only thing left to do is actually run it. To do that, we’ll periodically update our Kalman filter with our new encoder velocity measurements and apply new voltage commands to it. To do that, we first set the reference, then correct with the current flywheel speed, predict the Kalman filter into the next timestep, and apply the inputs generated using getU.


Java
  @Override
  public void teleopPeriodic() {
    // Sets the target speed of our flywheel. This is similar to setting the setpoint of a
    // PID controller.
    if (m_joystick.getTriggerPressed()) {
      // We just pressed the trigger, so let's set our next reference
      m_loop.setNextR(VecBuilder.fill(kSpinupRadPerSec));
    } else if (m_joystick.getTriggerReleased()) {
      // We just released the trigger, so let's spin down
      m_loop.setNextR(VecBuilder.fill(0.0));
    }

    // Correct our Kalman filter's state vector estimate with encoder data.
    m_loop.correct(VecBuilder.fill(m_encoder.getRate()));

    // Update our LQR to generate new voltage commands and use the voltages to predict the next
    // state with out Kalman filter.
    m_loop.predict(0.020);

    // Send the new calculated voltage to the motors.
    // voltage = duty cycle * battery voltage, so
    // duty cycle = voltage / battery voltage
    double nextVoltage = m_loop.getU(0);
    m_motor.setVoltage(nextVoltage);
  }
}

C++

Python
Angle Wrap with LQR
Mechanisms with a continuous angle can have that angle wrapped by calling the code below instead of lqr.Calculate(x, r).


JAVA
var error = lqr.getR().minus(x);
error.set(0, 0, MathUtil.angleModulus(error.get(0, 0)));
var u = lqr.getK().times(error);




tate observers combine information about a system’s behavior and external measurements to estimate the true state of the system. A common observer used for linear systems is the Kalman Filter. Kalman filters are advantageous over other filters as they fuse measurements from one or more sensors with a state-space model of the system to optimally estimate a system’s state.

This image shows flywheel velocity measurements over time, run through a variety of different filters. Note that a well-tuned Kalman filter shows no measurement lag during flywheel spinup while still rejecting noisy data and reacting quickly to disturbances as balls pass through it. More on filters can be found in the filters section.

Filter comparison between: Kalman, Median, and IIR.
Gaussian Functions
Kalman filters utilize a Gaussian distribution to model the noise in a process 1. In the case of a Kalman filter, the estimated state of the system is the mean, while the variance is a measure of how certain (or uncertain) the filter is about the true state.

../../../../_images/normal-distribution.png
The idea of variance and covariance is central to the function of a Kalman filter. Covariance is a measurement of how two random variables are correlated. In a system with a single state, the covariance matrix is simply
, or a matrix containing the variance
 of the state
. The magnitude of this variance is the square of the standard deviation of the Gaussian function describing the current state estimate. Relatively large values for covariance might indicate noisy data, while small covariances might indicate that the filter is more confident about it’s estimate. Remember that “large” and “small” values for variance or covariance are relative to the base unit being used – for example, if
 was measured in meters,
 would be in meters squared.

Covariance matrices are written in the following form:



Kalman Filters
Important

It is important to develop an intuition for what a Kalman filter is actually doing. The book Kalman and Bayesian Filters in Python by Roger Labbe provides a great visual and interactive introduction to Bayesian filters. The Kalman filters in WPILib use linear algebra to gentrify the math, but the ideas are similar to the single-dimensional case. We suggest reading through Chapter 4 to gain an intuition for what these filters are doing.

To summarize, Kalman filters (and all Bayesian filters) have two parts: prediction and correction. Prediction projects our state estimate forward in time according to our system’s dynamics, and correct steers the estimated state towards the measured state. While filters often perform both in the same timestep, it’s not strictly necessary – For example, WPILib’s pose estimators call predict frequently, and correct only when new measurement data is available (for example, from a low-framerate vision system).

The following shows the equations of a discrete-time Kalman filter:




The state estimate
, together with
, describe the mean and covariance of the Gaussian function that describes our filter’s estimate of the system’s true state.

Process and Measurement Noise Covariance Matrices
The process and measurement noise covariance matrices
 and
 describe the variance of each of our states and measurements. Remember that for a Gaussian function, variance is the square of the function’s standard deviation. In a WPILib, Q, and R are diagonal matrices whose diagonals contain their respective variances. For example, a Kalman filter with states

 and measurements

 with state standard deviations

 and measurement standard deviation

 would have the following
 and
 matrices:




Error Covariance Matrix
The error covariance matrix
 describes the covariance of the state estimate
. Informally,
 describes our certainty about the estimated state. If
 is large, our uncertainty about the true state is large. Conversely, a
 with smaller elements would imply less uncertainty about our true state.

As we project the model forward,
 increases as our certainty about the system’s true state decreases.

Predict step
In prediction, our state estimate is updated according to the linear system dynamics
. Furthermore, our error covariance
 increases by the process noise covariance matrix
. Larger values of
 will make our error covariance
 grow more quickly. This
 is used in the correction step to weight the model and measurements.

Correct step
In the correct step, our state estimate is updated to include new measurement information. This new information is weighted against the state estimate
 by the Kalman gain
. Large values of
 more highly weight incoming measurements, while smaller values of
 more highly weight our state prediction. Because
 is related to
, larger values of
 will increase
 and more heavily weight measurements. If, for example, a filter is predicted for a long duration, the large
 would heavily weight the new information.

Finally, the error covariance
 decreases to increase our confidence in the state estimate.

Tuning Kalman Filters
WPILib’s Kalman Filter classes’ constructors take a linear system, a vector of process noise standard deviations and measurement noise standard deviations. These are converted to
 and
 matrices by filling the diagonals with the square of the standard deviations, or variances, of each state or measurement. By decreasing a state’s standard deviation (and therefore its corresponding entry in
), the filter will distrust incoming measurements more. Similarly, increasing a state’s standard deviation will trust incoming measurements more. The same holds for the measurement standard deviations – decreasing an entry will make the filter more highly trust the incoming measurement for the corresponding state, while increasing it will decrease trust in the measurement.


Java
  // The observer fuses our encoder data and voltage inputs to reject noise.
  private final KalmanFilter<N1, N1, N1> m_observer =
      new KalmanFilter<>(
          Nat.N1(),
          Nat.N1(),
          m_flywheelPlant,
          VecBuilder.fill(3.0), // How accurate we think our model is
          VecBuilder.fill(0.01), // How accurate we think our encoder
          // data is
          0.020);

C++

Python
Footnotes
[1]
In a real robot, noise comes from all sorts of sources. Stray electromagnetic radiation adds extra voltages to sensor readings, vibrations, and temperature variations throw off inertial measurement units, gear lash causes encoders to have inaccuracies when directions change… all sorts of things. It’s important to realize that, by themselves, each of these sources of “noise” aren’t guaranteed to follow any pattern. Some of them might be the “white noise” random vibrations you’ve probably heard on the radio. Others might be “pops” or single-loop errors. Others might be nominally zero, but strongly correlated with events on the robot. However, the Central Limit Theorem shows mathematically that regardless of how the individual sources of noise are distributed, as we add more and more of them up their combined effect eventually is distributed like a Gaussian. Since we do not know the exact individual sources of noise, the best choice of a model we can make is indeed that Gaussian function.

One of the most common causes of bugs with state-space controllers is signs being flipped. For example, models included in WPILib expect positive voltage to result in a positive acceleration, and vice versa. If applying a positive voltage does not make the mechanism accelerate forwards, or if moving “forwards” makes encoder (or other sensor readings) decrease, they should be inverted so that positive voltage input results in a positive encoder reading. For example, if I apply an input of
 (full forwards for the left and right motors) to my differential drivetrain, my wheels should propel my robot “forwards” (along the +X axis locally), and for my encoders to read a positive velocity.

Important

The WPILib DifferentialDrive, by default, does not invert any motors. You may need to call the setInverted(true) method on the motor controller object to invert so that positive input creates forward motion.

The Importance of Graphs
Reliable data of the system’s states, inputs and outputs over time is important when debugging state-space controllers and observers. One common approach is to send this data over NetworkTables and use tools such as Shuffleboard, which allow us to both graph the data in real-time as well as save it to a CSV file for plotting later with tools such as Google Sheets, Excel, or Python.

Note

By default, NetworkTables is limited to a 10hz update rate. For testing, this can be bypassed with the following code snippet to submit data at up to 100hz. This code should be run periodically to forcibly publish new data.

Danger

This will send extra data (at up to 100hz) over NetworkTables, which can cause lag with both user code and robot dashboards. This will also increase network utilization. It is often a good idea to disable this during competitions.


JAVA
@Override
public void robotPeriodic() {
   NetworkTableInstance.getDefault().flush();
}

C++

PYTHON
Compensating for Input Lag
Often times, some sensor input data (i.e. velocity readings) may be delayed due to onboard filtering that smart motor controllers tend to perform. By default, LQR’s K gain assumes no input delay, so introducing significant delay on the order of tens of milliseconds can cause instability. To combat this, the LQR’s K gain can be reduced, trading off performance for stability. A code example for how to compensate for this latency in a mathematically rigorous manner is available here.




